## anos - An Operating System 💾

> **Note**: This is not yet an operating system. It's not even a toy.
> I may continue to grow it, or I may not. I'm really just doing
> it to learn some things I skipped last time I played around with
> OS dev.

A toy operating system I'm using as a vehicle for learning more about
the low level, figuring out things I skipped last time (like long mode)
and really getting to grips with things I just copy-pasted from other
people (like paging).

This time, I'm copy-pasting nothing. I'm trying to not even _look_ 
at other people's code - as much as possible I'm just going from 
official reference materials (like the Intel manuals).

  - Ross Bamford, August 2023

### Building

Everything is built with `make`. You'll want a cross-compiler
toolchain for `x86_64` (for `ld` at the moment, though I'll almost
certainly end up using `gcc` too) along with cross `binutils` 
(for `objcopy` and `objdump` at least). Latest versions of these
are recommended.

For running and debugging, you'll want `qemu-system-x86_64`. 
Bochs is also supported if you prefer (there's a minimal `bochsrc`
in the repo that will get you going).

To build the FAT filesystem for the floppy image, `mtools` is
needed, specifically `mformat`, `mcopy` - but I don't know if 
you can get just those, and it's best to get the whole suite
anyway as it can be useful for debugging things.

You'll need a sane build environment (i.e. a UNIX) with `make` 
etc. FWIW I work on macOS, YMMV on Linux or WSL (but I expect
it should work fine).

There are probably some test programs and helpers that I use 
in the repo (e.g. `fat.c`). These will need a native Clang or GCC
toolchain - again, sane build environment recommended... 😜

To build, just do:

```shell
make clean all
```

As part of the build, all the objects are built to ELF format with
debugging info, and a disassembly file is created. These are then
stripped to binary

### Debugging

The recommended way to debug is with qemu. Bochs _is_ still supported,
and the debugger built into it isn't _bad_, but full-fat GDB is pretty
hard to beat and it works well with qemu.

For convenience, a `.gdbinit` file is provided that will automate
loading the symbols and connecting to qemu. This can be easily
kicked off with:

```shell
make debug-qemu
```

This will build what needs to be built, start qemu with debugging,
and launch GDB automatically.

> **Note** You'll want NASM 2.16 or higher if you have a modern
> GDB (13 and up) - I've observed issues with loading DWARF data
> generated by NASM 2.15, which causes symbol clashes and sources 
> not to be loaded.

Because symbols and sources are loaded, you can set breakpoints 
easily based on labels or line numbers, e.g:

```gdb
b stage2.asm:_start
b stage1.asm:35
```

If you prefer to use debugging in an IDE or have some other alternative
GDB frontend you like to use, you can just run:

```shell
make debug-qemu-start
```

which will skip starting GDB for you, allowing you to launch 
your frontend and connect (`localhost:9666` by default).


